All right. So let's look at the rules
for determining which overloaded method will be executed
as defined by the Java Specification.
Now what I've done here is
put together an extremely simplified synopsis
from the Java Specification page.
We're going to link to the original source material
for Java 11 in the resources section for this video.
Now there's a lot of information on the specification.
What I'm going to focus on
is on section 15.12.2 Compile-Time,
specifically Step 2, Determine Method Signature
and this describes three phases.
Phase 1, it performs an overloaded resolution
without permitting boxing or unboxing conversion
or the use of variable arity's,
or var arguments, method invocation.
Within Phase 1, if multiple methods meet this criteria,
the best method is then selected by,
one, choose method with exact match or matches,
then choose method with more specific match or matches.
Note that, for primitives, subtypes are considered
to climb up either of these branches,
i.e "char" is a subtype of "int",
"byte" is not a subtype of "char",
"int" can be considered a subtype of "double"
for method selection.
So we've got byte, short, int,
then char, int, long float, double.
So if a primitive is passed and a method exists
within a parameter that uses widening,
this will be selected
and narrowing conversion, on the other hand,
won't be selected.
Phase 2, it allows boxing and unboxing,
but ignores variable arity, so var args again,
method invocation.
And finally, Phase 3, it allows overloading to be
combined with variable arity, var args, methods,
boxing and unboxing.
So putting this more simply,
var arg methods will match dead last
if better options exist.
You may get one question on the exam
regarding this selection.
Pay careful attention to the exam question.
It's pretty easy to overlook the ellipsis
for the var args parameter,
if you're reading "int..." versus "int", for example.
All right. So with that said,
let's walk now through a couple of these rules
with some sample code.
We're going to create a new class
in our Methods project called OverloadMatches.
This class has got four overloaded methods for "thisOne"
or called "thisOne".
You're using a type of Integer,
type long, type short, now a type char var args.
You can see the use of ellipses down here for char,
so if you're using your var args for that on line 20.
Now, we're going to just go ahead
and have a look at the code that actually calls it.
We'll call the method with a parameter type of char
that doesn't exactly match any of them.
Let's run this.
Interesting there that long was matched.
Maybe we expected it to match short
or the var args char parameter that we defined
in our overloaded method up here on line 20.
So keep in mind that a char will never be widened to a short
from the rules we described earlier
and it will match on long, a widening conversion,
before it will ever get to Phase 3
to check the var args parameter.
So let's test this further.
We're going to now add a fifth overloaded method here.
But see this time it's,
the parameter is a char wrapper class of a Character.
Se we're using Character here, which of course,
is a wrapper for the char.
We run this.
Think about what you'd expect to see when I do this.
Now if I run it,
you can see we've got no change to the output.
Why?
Well again, the rules described in the slide in this video
indicate that parameters won't be evaluated
for wrappers with boxing and unboxing
until the second phase,
if the first phase completes with no matches.
So even though we think the Character wrapper class
is a better match,
the Java Virtual Machine won't use it
and it didn't in this scenario.
The reason for this has to do with backwards compatibility
of older code.
You can certainly force the issue
by making the call an exact match
and pass the "char" in a wrapper yourself.
Finally, since a constructor is, in actuality,
just a method with a few special restrictions,
constructors can be overloaded too
with the same set of rules applied.
There are only two ways to execute constructors,
using "new" in the process of instantiating a new object
and passing the appropriate parameters,
or by doing something called constructor chaining
which is calling a different overloaded constructor
from another constructor.
Now since you only use this parenthesis
as the first statement in a constructor,
you can only do that in the first statement.
Therefore you can only create a single chain.
So let's demonstrate both of these statements in code.
So we're going to create another class here,
we'll call this ConstructorOverload.
Okay. So there's that code.
Now, in this code I've defined three constructors
which why then we can have a look at them.
Line 17, line 22 and then also, line 31.
Noting that we're actually creating
a constructor chain here.
So by the use of this,
you can see that in the case of the second
and third constructors.
So a single args constructor will make a call
to the no args constructor,
you can see that on line 24,
and then populate the variable "mixAndMatch".
And the "toString" constructor will make a call
to the single args constructor,
you can see it doing that on line 33,
which, in turn, calls the no arguments constructor,
incrementing the counter
and then populates the variable "mixAndMatch".
So basically, we're demonstrating the three different ways
to instantiate an object in this class
as we go down looking at the code in the main method.
So if you run this now,
so you can see from this output
that nothing was printed for instance 3
and that's because I've only used the no args constructor
which doesn't have a "System.out.println".
Go up and have a look at that.
It's just got the counter increment on line 18,
but the other ones work as expected as you can see.
So finishing up.
In the last video on this one,
we've covered both overloaded methods and constructors
and we've talked about how the Java Virtual Machine
picks an overloaded method
when parameters don't exactly match perfectly.
In the next video,
we're going to talk about what's odd
and interesting about this process.
So let's move onto that video.